# Node Setup
Note: Irys is currently in a closed testnet - this means you cannot run a miner to connect to the official testnet without contacting us (Irys).\
You can, however, run a localnet - for that, see [localnet quickstart](#localnet-quickstart).

# Building
Supported platforms: Linux, MacOS \
Rust version: 1.86+ (stable)\
Other dependencies:\
    - clang & a C/C++ build toolchain\
    - gmp\
    - pkg-config

The NVIDIA feature flag/CUDA accelerated matrix packing requires the latest CUDA toolkit (12.6+)\
and GCC-13 (as well as g++ 13).\
See .devcontainer/setup.sh for more information.


# Configuring
You can get the default configuration file (`config.toml`) by running the node: `cargo run --bin irys`\
This will write the default configuration file, and then exit.
## Config file overview:
The config file is comprised of header sections like `[category.subcategory(...)]`.\
All the config options under the `[consensus(...)]` category **must be the same between all nodes in the network**.\
All other configuration options are *per-node* and can be freely changed.\
There is a secondary config, `.irys_submodules.toml` that is autogenerated in the data dir (default: `./.irys/.irys_submodules.toml`) that defines the path to each storage module the node should use for storage.\
You can optionally provide links to mounted filesystems, which will be automatically symlinked into the `submodules` data dir subfolder, if `is_using_hardcoded_paths = false` .

## Notable configuration options
These are the configuration options you *should* change when configuring a new node:
-  `mode`: either `Genesis`, `PeerSync` or `TrustedPeerSync` 
    - If you are running a local network, use `Genesis` - otherwise, use `PeerSync`
- `base_directory`: The fully qualified path to where the Irys node should store all it's data. 
    - Note: Changing this will require you to manually move your existing data directory.
- `mining_key`: Hex encoded EVM private key that the node uses to interact with the network.
- `trusted_peers`: A list of trusted peers that the node should use to bootstrap
    - Note: Currently, all peers you wish to connect with must have an entry in trusted_peers.
- `reward_address`: The EVM address that should receive block rewards.
- `stake_pledge_drives`: Whether to automatically stake & pledge drives to enable mining on startup.
    - Note: If you are a genesis node, this is automatically done for you
- `public_ip`, `public_port`, `bind_ip`, `bind_port` (both `http` and `gossip` categories):
    - These control the public ip:port that other nodes can connect to access this node, and the ip:port the node should bind to locally.
    - Ensure that the public ip:port is fully accessible, otherwise P2P will not function.
- `cpu_packing_concurrency`: The maximum number of CPU threads to allocate to data matrix packing (more = faster packing).
    - This only affects mining nodes.


### Notable consensus options
`num_chunks_in_partition` - This controls the number of chunks per partition - if you have limited storage for your localnet, set this value lower.\
 Storage consumption is (chunk_size * num_chunks_in_partition * (number of partitions)).\
 For localnets, the default number of partitions is 3.


### Localnet quickstart:
- Run the node: `cargo run --bin irys`
- Open the config `./config.toml`
- Set `mode` to `Genesis`
- Set `num_chunks_in_partition` to `800`
- Run the node: `cargo run --bin irys`\
This will run a small, low-capacity localnet node that you can interact with:
- HTTP API: http://localhost:8080 
- Eth JSON-RPC API: http://localhost:8080/v1/execution-rpc


These docs are a WIP - [PRs welcome!](https://github.com/Irys-xyz/irys)